feat: remote state backends (#6911)
meltano/meltano: docs/src/_concepts/state_backends.md

layout: doc
weight: 3
---

Many Meltano pipelines load data incrementally.
In order for these pipelines to run efficiently and properly without dropping historical data or loading duplicate records, Meltano needs to keep track of the state of a pipeline as part of each run.
This state can be stored in Meltano's backend system database, but
for Meltano projects running in ephemeral environments or in circumstances where administering a dedicated backend database is undesirable, Meltano also supports persisting state in remote state backends backed by cloud storage services.

## Installation

To cut down on extraneous dependencies, Meltano imports cloud storage client libraries lazily and these libraries are not included in the base `meltano` package.

Only the default system database state backend _or_ the local filesystem state backend can be used as part of the base `meltano` distribution.

To use a cloud storage backend, install Meltano using one of the following (extras)[https://peps.python.org/pep-0508/#extras]:
- `meltano[s3]` to use the AWS S3 state backend.
- `meltano[azure]` to use the Azure Blob Storage state backend.

> - `meltano[gcs]` to use the Google Cloud Storage state backend.

Reviewer: Might be good to document these in `docs/src/_guide/advanced-topics.md` too

## Configuration

The state backend settings for your Meltano project can be configured much the same as any other Meltano setting. For some state backends, the only required setting is `state_backend.uri`. 
By default, `state_backend.uri` is set to the special keyword string `systemdb`, which will tell Meltano to store state in the same backend database as it stores other project data. 

It can be changed by running `meltano config meltano set state_backend.uri <URI for desired state backend>` or by directly editing a project's `meltano.yml` to add the following:
```yaml
state_backend:
	uri: <URI for desired state backend>
```

> For some state backends and in some environments, `uri` is the only setting that needs to be configured in order to use a state backend other than the default `systemdb` backend. For instance, to store state directly on the local filesystem at the path `${MELTANO_ROOT_DIR}/.meltano/state`, simply run `meltano config meltano set state_backend.uri file:///${MELTANO_ROOT_DIR}/.meltano/state`. 
> Then Meltano will store the state for a given `state_id` at the path `${MELTANO_ROOT_DIR}/.meltano/state/<state_id>/state.json`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For some state backends and in some environments, `uri` is the only setting that needs to be configured in order to use a state backend other than the default `systemdb` backend. For instance, to store state directly on the local filesystem at the path `${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state`, simply run `meltano config meltano set 'state_backend.uri file:///${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state'`. Note the single quotes which prevent the early expansion of the environment variable.
Then Meltano will store the state for a given `state_id` at the path `${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state/<state_id>/state.json`.
```

### Locking

Because the `systemdb` state backend utilizes a transactional database, it can rely on the database's transaction logic to prevent conflicts among multiple runs of the same pipeline.
For some other state backends, Meltano implements its own simple locking mechanism.
This locking mechanism utilizes reasonable defaults but you may wish to configure the locking settings differently. 
You can do this via two additional top-level `state_backend` settings: `state_backend.lock_timeout_seconds` and `state_backend.lock_retry_seconds`.

When Meltano tries to read or write state for a given `state_id`, it will try to acquire a _lock_ on the state data for that `state_id`.

> For example, using the local filesystem state backend with `state_backend.uri` set to `file:///${MELTANO_ROOT_DIR}/.meltano/state`, it will check to see if a file exists at the path `${MELTANO_ROOT_DIR}/.meltano/state/<state_id>/lock`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, using the local filesystem state backend with `state_backend.uri` set to `file:///${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state`, it will check to see if a file exists at the path `${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state/<state_id>/lock`. 
```

These can be configured via the `state_backend.gcs.application_credentials` setting.

If credentials are not provided via these settings, Meltano will use the value the `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS` environment variable, if it is set.

If GCS credentials are not found via any of the methods described above, Meltano will not be able to authenticate to Google Cloud Storage and state operations will fail.

## Configuration

The state backend settings for your Meltano project can be configured much the same as any other Meltano setting. For some state backends, the only required setting is `state_backend.uri`.
By default, `state_backend.uri` is set to the special keyword string `systemdb`, which will tell Meltano to store state in the same backend database as it stores other project data.

It can be changed by running `meltano config meltano set state_backend.uri <URI for desired state backend>` or by directly editing a project's `meltano.yml` to add the following:
```yaml
state_backend:
    uri: <URI for desired state backend>
```

> For some state backends and in some environments, `uri` is the only setting that needs to be configured in order to use a state backend other than the default `systemdb` backend. For instance, to store state directly on the local filesystem at the path `${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state`, simply run `meltano config meltano set 'state_backend.uri file:///${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state'`. Note the single quotes which prevent the early expansion of the environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some state backends and in some environments, `uri` is the only setting that needs to be configured in order to use a state backend other than the default `systemdb` backend. For instance, to store state directly on the local filesystem at the path `${MELTANO_SYS_DIR_ROOT}/state`, simply run `meltano config meltano set 'state_backend.uri file:///${MELTANO_SYS_DIR_ROOT}/state'`. Note the single quotes which prevent the early expansion of the environment variable.
```

> Then Meltano will store the state for a given `state_id` at the path `${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state/<state_id>/state.json`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then Meltano will store the state for a given `state_id` at the path `file:///${MELTANO_SYS_DIR_ROOT}/state/<state_id>/state.json`.
```

### Locking

Because the `systemdb` state backend utilizes a transactional database, it can rely on the database's transaction logic to prevent conflicts among multiple runs of the same pipeline.
For some other state backends, Meltano implements its own simple locking mechanism.
This locking mechanism utilizes reasonable defaults but you may wish to configure the locking settings differently.
You can do this via two additional top-level `state_backend` settings: `state_backend.lock_timeout_seconds` and `state_backend.lock_retry_seconds`.

When Meltano tries to read or write state for a given `state_id`, it will try to acquire a lock on the state data for that `state_id`.

> For example, using the local filesystem state backend with `state_backend.uri` set to `file:///${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state`, it will check to see if a file exists at the path `${MELTANO_PROJECT_ROOT}/.meltano/state/<state_id>/lock`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, using the local filesystem state backend with `state_backend.uri` set to `file:///${MELTANO_SYS_DIR_ROOT}/state`, it will check to see if a file exists at the path `file:///${MELTANO_SYS_DIR_ROOT}/state/<state_id>/lock`.
```
